---
layout: post
title: "The Mystery of 'The Mystery of Inflation'"
date: 2024-08-28
permalink: /mystery-of-inflation/
---

One of my favorite non-political podcasts is “Jimmy Akin’s Mysterious World.” The host, Jimmy Akin, explores a wide range of topics, focusing on the paranormal. Occasionally, the podcast explores a topic outside of its normal range. In this case, I was drawn to the episode “[The Mystery of Inflation](www.youtube.com/watch?v=qS10iGS04IY){:target="_blank"}.” There is a running gag on the show where Akin will talk about “inflation the government has caused” when he mentions how much a monetary amount in the past is worth nowadays. In this episode, he attempts to explain what he means by this line. Given Akin’s attitude towards the subject, I expected to largely agree with what he had to say in this episode. Before I listened to the episode, I noticed several links in the episode description to talks by Milton Friedman, perhaps the most famous Chicago School economist. My own understanding of economics is rooted in the [Austrian School tradition](mises.org), which stands in opposition to the Chicago School on monetary economics, leading me to reconsider how much I would agree with the episode’s content.

After listening to the episode, I can only say that I am quite disappointed. I hold Akin in high regard; he is exceptionally intelligent and well-read across various subjects, so I expected more from him, even on a topic outside his usual expertise. While I tried to be as forgiving as possible in judging this episode, there are a few fallacies presented that were almost impossible to interpret as anything besides fundamental misunderstandings of economics.

# Fallacy #1: The "Natural Exchange Rate"

To illustrate the effect of the money supply on the price of goods, Akin uses an example of a simple economy with only 2 goods: money and jelly beans. The example is as follows:
 > Let’s imagine the government has only minted 100 pennies [...] In our economy, the only goods and services that people want are jelly beans and let’s suppose that at the moment, there are only 100 jelly beans [...] In this economy, what is the price of a jelly bean? It’d be 1 cent [...] The natural exchange rate is 1 cent per jelly bean.
While this example is not meant to capture every possible nuance, examples are intended to convey broader truths. Akin’s example implies that there is a 'natural exchange rate' that can be determined purely by the ratio of money to goods. He goes on to say
 > Soon, there are 200 jelly beans on the market [...] What’s the natural price of a jelly bean now? Half a cent.
Akin continues the segment with similar examples, varying the jelly bean and money supplies and stating that the new price should be according to the proportional change in the amounts of the goods. I think that a lot of people would jump to these same conclusions. However, even in such a simple economy, one cannot make definitive statements about price. First of all, if the money has no value except as a medium of exchange, the price of jelly beans would be infinite. Everybody would always immediately sell their money for jelly beans, causing what could be called hyperinflation despite a fixed supply of money. Ignoring this possibility, we also have to account for the fact that money is not only used to trade other goods and services, but as a way of continuously making intertemporal trades, also known as saving. There are no simple calculations to determine the price of the jelly beans because human preferences - their desire for jelly beans and their propensity to save - are constantly changing and cannot be known apart from being revealed through transactions they actually engage in. There is no such thing as a “natural exchange rate,” especially one derived from the ratio of their total supplies. Prices are always determined at the margin based on how many jelly beans and cents each person has and at what ratios he is willing to trade one for the other. Finally, I think it is fundamentally unhelpful to think of an economy in this sort of simple, mathematical way. One of the main draws of the Austrian School is that it subscribes to methodological individualism - putting subjective valuations and individual human action at the forefront - instead of trying to boil something as complex as the economy down to a mathematical system. While it may be true that “all models are wrong, but some are useful,” when it comes to economics, there is a tremendous overconfidence in the power and accuracy of models.

# Fallacy #2: How Does the Money Supply Grow?

Perhaps the biggest fallacy in the episode, which seems to undercut the very point he is trying to make, is Akin’s explanation of how inflation occurs. His idea is essentially that when the government increases the money supply, it takes some time for prices to adjust to the new “natural exchange rate” demanded by the new sizes of the supply of goods and money. He states that when there is new money and lower prices, people are better off since they have more money to buy things at the same price. His logic seems to imply that once the new natural exchange rate is reached, the prices would essentially be the same as before, due to his idea of a linear kind of price increase. Even if we do not assume that the relationships are linear, there is no reason to believe that wages would not increase equally or more than the price of goods, leaving people no worse off in the new state of affairs. Thus, it seems that people are always at least as well off after an increase in the money supply - they are either enjoying more money with old prices or more money with a proportional increase in prices. In fact, if it takes some time for the new “natural exchange rate” to emerge, why wouldn’t it be possible to constantly print new money and prevent the new equilibrium from stabilizing? Clearly, we understand that there is something bad about inflation, so there must be problems with this analysis. I think that common Austrian school observations about inflation provide a clearer understanding of the destructive nature of inflation.
1. The Cantillon Effect: While Akin does not really expound upon this idea, the Cantillon effect explains how prices increase after the money supply increases. The important point is that the government is never proportionally increasing everyone’s money. In fact, the only truly equal way to do this would be to proportionally increase the “value” of each dollar, which would be tantamount to doing nothing. In reality, someone must get the new money first. In the American context, it is generally the banking sector and from there “trickling down” through the economy starting with the wealthy elite. These people do enjoy new money with old prices, as Akin described. However, what he fails to mention is the opposite of this. As the money makes its way through the economy, prices begin to rise unevenly based on what people receiving the new money are buying. Before the money makes its way to everyone, prices have already risen in response to the increase in the money supply. For each winner, there must be a loser (in fact, more than one loser, since inflation is overall destructive). This is one of the main reasons inflation hurts ordinary people so much. With reduced access to government hand-outs and the financial markets, it is very hard for these people to reap the initial rewards of new money, making them the losers of the Cantillon effect. More simply, increases in wages at best lags and often does not even keep up with increases in prices.
2. Erosion of savings: Another reason inflation is so harmful is that it devalues savings. Any cash savings are constantly losing value due to inflation. This is why buying stocks and real estate has become almost mandatory in today’s inflation-ridden society. Inflation hurts savers and benefits debtors. It hurts retirees, who often live on savings or fixed income. It discourages saving and long-term thinking. This very important point is not even mentioned in the podcast.

# Fallacy #3: An Ideal Inflation Rate?

A third point I want to make concerns his conclusions. Akin concludes by saying that ideally, there is neither too much inflation or too much deflation - with the monetary authorities aiming for “stable prices.” There are several problems with this.
First of all, there is the perennial question of “who decides?” The answer given by orthodox economists is the central bank, which is the Federal Reserve in the US. Criticizing the Federal Reserve is beyond the scope of this piece, but suffice it to say that anyone who generally believes in free markets and limited government, like Milton Friedman and (presumably) Jimmy Akin, should also be extremely suspicious of centralized control of the money supply. If socialism, public control of the means of production, is riddled with theoretical and practical problems, why should governing controlling the money, the most important means of production, not be extremely disastrous?
Secondly, without fiat money, the world converged on the gold standard, which was deflationary. People are incentivized to hold an asset whose value increases, so convergence on a deflationary money will always happen if competition in money is allowed. Truly, a regime of stable prices can only use fiat money in addition to government banning any alternatives. Since fiat requires no work to produce, if anyone were allowed to produce it, its value would quickly be driven to zero. In reality, the production of new fiat money is highly permissioned, so that those in power have some incentive to not immediately crash the system. Even then, we see that fiat money has given us chronic inflation as governments try to milk their monetary privilege as much as possible. Ultimately, fiat currencies all end with hyperinflation, when the value of the money finally reaches its cost of production.

# Conclusion

To conclude, I think this episode of Jimmy Akin’s Mysterious World shows the deep flaws that run through common understanding of economics, especially when it comes to money. Even educated, good meaning people can make very fundamental mistakes in their understanding. It was even very difficult for me to completely reason through these concepts and ideas (and I wouldn’t be surprised if I made many mistakes myself), and the only reason I can even write something sensible about this is because I’ve read many books about these very specific topics and am able to reproduce what they say, more or less. Chronic inflation can never be solved until people drop the unfounded ideal of stable prices and their fear of deflation and embrace the “radical” Austrian views about money.

# Resources

For good Austrian School treatments of monetary economics and the need for sound money, I recommend the following books:
 - [The Bitcoin Standard](cryptache.ro/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/The-Bitcoin-Standard-The-Decentralized-Alternative-to-Central-Banking-PDF-Room.pdf) by Saifedean Ammous. This is the best-selling book about Bitcoin, written by Austriain economist Saifedean Ammous.
 - [What has Government Done to Our Money?](mises.org/library/book/what-has-government-done-our-money) by Murray Rothbard. One of the most influential Austrian economists of the 20th century, Murray Rothbard, gives a summary of how government has created the destructive fiat money regime we use today.